in everyone Laszlo Montgomery here after
a world record longest break in the
action ever here in the history of the
China history podcast I've been busy
emptying my nest and sending the last of
the Montgomerys off to college and most
of all I've been tied up writing this
speech that I'll be giving September
16th in Shenyang today I'm grabbing the
opportunity to get one more CHP episode
out before I take that Cathay flight
across the Pacific to start my long
China trip still planning to be in
Beijing September 18 to 28 and looking
forward to meeting a lot of my listeners
out there all people with good taste
today we're going to look at a topic
that I thought was pretty interesting
it's another in a series of podcasts I
hope to do from time to time that covers
the history of the Chinese diaspora I
plan to do some episodes on the history
of the Chinese in Canada Singapore
Malaysia Indonesia Australia you know
and elsewhere but today we focus on
Mexico Estados Unidos mexicanos our fine
neighbor to the south of us here in the
US the story of the Chinese people who
came to Mexico in the late 19th and
early 20th centuries is often a sad and
tragic one they came to Mexico for all
the same reasons Chinese came to
California to flee the chaos of China in
to seek economic opportunities in the
Americas more than 60,000 Chinese at one
time or another made the trip that took
them to Mexico directly from China or
via the United States if you recall from
that old CHP 44 episode on the Chinese
Exclusion Acts the whole story really
began in January 1848 when gold was
discovered in California and the whole
Gold Rush began
Chinese laborers were warmly welcomed to
work the mines
thanks to their well-earned reputation
of being hard workers willing to work
for 30 to 40 percent less than the
whites and for
keeping their mouth shut even when they
were getting the shaft
18:54 people versus hall made it legal
in the u.s. to go bash a Chinese and get
away with it this was a sign of the
times that were coming in those Chinese
who called California home began to be
more vigilant than ever to the threat of
potential violence against them 1862
work began on the building of the
Transcontinental railroads and no time
at all this led to heated tensions as
white workers who organized a strike for
higher wages were stymied by the
railroad bosses who began to import
Chinese laborers by 1867 much to the
chagrin of the white working man I
imagine 9 out of 10 workers in the u.s.
building the railroads came from China
1867 the opportunistic working man's
party tapped into this boiling
anti-chinese sentiment and famously
adopted as their slogan the Chinese must
go anti Chinese immigration was quite a
popular cause as the 1870s rolled around
even California's own governor John
Bigler publicly denounced the Chinese
and urged his constituents to quote
check this tide of Asiatic immigration
the panic of 1873 led to a worldwide
depression that put a major damper on
the good times everyone was having in
the US and particularly in California
times were tough and unemployment was
rampant someone had to be blamed for the
suffering of the people in 1877 the
great railroad strike led to violence
against Chinese and San Francisco nine
percent of the population in California
was Chinese by then the anti-chinese
sentiment never ran higher during these
economically tough times they were
constantly targeted and the list of
atrocities committed against Chinese
mostly in California and the western US
is a long one
the popular sentiment aided and abetted
by Paulo
who knew a popular cause to wrap their
arms around when they saw it
set the stage for the Chinese Exclusion
Act of 1882 the Chinese Exclusion Act
slammed the door shut on any further
Chinese immigration into the USA the
Scott Act of 1888 tightened it a little
as did the Gary act of 1892 then in 1905
after the Chinese had figured out the
last remaining loopholes the Supreme
Court plugged them all when they ruled
in the case of US vs. Jew toy so
beginning in 1882 the Democrat
politicians and the labor unions in the
US and whoever else didn't like Chinese
immigration all got to take a nice
victory lap the Jew toy decision had an
immediate impact on the numbers of
Chinese who now had to consider other
options than the USA and not only did
the exclusion act and US vs. juta make
it impossible to immigrate it also
severely degraded the civil rights of
legal Chinese who lived in the US
this included Chinese who had been born
and raised there this racist immigration
law was kept in force for 61 years until
1943 when it was repealed by the
Magnuson act so all of this background
has everything to do with our topic
today we can zoom way out you could see
the big picture Mexico has a long border
with the US that runs from San Diego
California to Brownsville Texas 3145
miles and all if the Great Wall is 5,500
miles long like Mexico border is a
almost 60 percent of that it's long the
greater part of our story takes place in
the Mexican states of Sonora and Baja
these are the states that border
California and Arizona Sonora is largest
cities are Hermosillo Nogales Magdalena
up they're gone and
famous in Baja State Mexicali was the
main center of Chinese Mexicans a good
part of the story of the Chinese
Mexicans takes place there but also in
Mexico City and other places in the
south as well the USA in Mexico don't
see eye to eye on a lot of things but
they were sure in lockstep when it came
to persecuting the Chinese during the
time period of the early 1870s all the
way into the 1940s this was a sad time
for Chinese in the US and Mexico but
despite all the sadness there were
plenty of stories of Chinese who
persevered and hung in there for the
long haul and prospered and we're still
around today there's a Chinatown in
Mexicali
lachchi Niska and in Mexico City there's
also a very modest Chinatown el barrio
Chino that only runs for a couple of
blocks along Dolores Street in the old
city center there still an association
chena that keeps the flame lit this is a
chapter of the good old John Kwame Kwan
the Chinese consolidated Benevolent
Association still very much alive and
they have a chapter down in Mexicali
that does a lot of good works to make
sure the Chinese Mexican young uns have
the opportunity to participate in the
richness of Chinese culture beginning in
January 1919 when the 18th amendment was
passed that ushered in prohibition in
the u.s. Latin Eska in Mexicali became
the Vegas of its day that's where people
in the States would go back in the data
let their hair down I mean there was no
Vegas yet not as we know it they crossed
the border and you know shoot craps at
the casinos get all liquored up and high
on opium and if one was up to it they
could check out the delights of the
Mexicali skin trade la Chien Eska had
its heyday from 1919 until the 21st
amendment repealed prohibition in
December 1933 I could get in my car
right now and
Clermont and in three hours if I Drive
fast I could be in la Chien Eska having
a nice survey Sofia played a Chinese
food and some steaming hot tortillas I
got to talk to Rolando about doing that
one day but not in the summer it was 114
degrees when I was there a few summers
ago and it's a hundred and six in
Mexicali as I record this the whole idea
of Chinese people leaving the old
country for a place like Mexico began
way back in the sixteen hundreds when
Spanish galleons sailed the high seas
the reputation of the Chinese preceded
their arrival exports that China had
been profiting from since the Han
Dynasty namely silk porcelain lacquer
ware ivory and T were all well known in
the spanish-speaking world the trade
links had long been established between
Spanish and Chinese merchants the
Spanish had their base of trade
operations in Manila where all these
Chinese goods were laden onboard Spanish
galleons that sailed East twice a year
from Manila to sunny Acapulco in New
Spain as Mexico was called there the
goods were then distributed to the rich
people of Mexico and Latin America who
were the only ones who could afford
these Chinese luxury goods the first
Chinese to arrive in Mexico were the
servants of any number of Spanish
merchants who began to travel these
ships since the trade began in 1565
these Chinese accompanied their masters
to Mexico and the Chinese arrived and
dribs and drabs and the way it worked
for these earliest Chinese in Mexico
after they paid their dues if they
decided to stay they would keep their
eyes open for opportunities in Mexico as
a tradesman barber and most commonly as
shopkeepers engaged in petty retail at
the smallest capillaries of the consumer
market throughout the entire time that
Chinese have been immigrating in numbers
to Mexico in
u.s. networks would be built within
networks and as the years passed these
networks of relationships grew more
intricate like a Ponzi scheme it was
always the ones who arrived first who
made the most money after doing their
obligatory 8 10 years of bitter labor
these Chinese would climb up the ladder
one rung at a time and others would
follow and the older ones sponsored the
newly arrived ones and helped them rise
in society and served as a support
network this theme of Chinese helping
Chinese and these faraway lands goes way
back remember that thong shopping
episode when he did his stint in France
there's the same thing back then too in
Mexican society in the olden days when
all this was happening
the people were either rich or poor
there was no middle-class yet
the Chinese sort of played a role in
filling this gap being industrious and
hard-working
but neither rich nor poor they would
sometimes play this middle man role
between the two classes just like you
often see today in America with the
Koreans back in those days when you went
to your local grocery or general store
anywhere and Baja or Sonora it was
almost always run by a Chinese Mexican
and you could bet your life that the
wholesaler who was supplying the small
businessmen was also a Chinese the
Chinese Mexicans were strong in the
mercantile trade all the way up and down
the supply chain their success was a
source of a lot of red eyes and their
communities the Chinese always lived
apart
no Mexican wanted them near them and the
Chinese were probably just fine with
that so that was the way it was the
Chinese had always referred to the
Philippines as new Seoul which are the
characters for Luzon Mexico was referred
to as Dali song big Luzon and the
Philippines if they were it called it
yet began to be referred to as shall new
song her little Luzon
so these earliest Chinese who found
their way
Mexico and planted roots mostly came
with the Spanish galleon trade that
ended in 1815 with the Mexican
Revolution Spain really had a great run
for four centuries more Chinese
continued to come to Mexico many came
who already knew someone there most
didn't know anyone and came simply as
recruited laborer rolling the dice and
hoping for a better chance in life than
what could be expected in China but the
lion's share who came in the late 19th
and early 20th century came to Mexico
because frankly the door to the US was
closed and almost airtight after the
Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 and the
anti Chinese legislation that followed
if you were Chinese and felt compelled
to get into the u.s. yet to land in
Mexico first and use that as your
gateway into that place where the
streets were paved with gold if you
remember past China history podcast the
last decades of the ching dynasty were
bad times in china the impetus to get up
and leave china came from the civil
unrest caused by among other things the
Taiping rebellion famines overpopulation
and just one miserable year after
another in china and during the final
years of the ching dynasty the country
degraded into warlordism and there was a
breakdown and central authority and we
all know from watching the news today
what happens when that happens china was
having a rough time and for some these
were desperate times that required
desperate measures in these brave souls
even though the very thought of it was
repugnant to them picked up and left
china and tried their luck elsewhere
those years the 1850s 60s 70s and into
the 20th century saw a massive Chinese
diaspora from 1848 to 1888 over 2
million Chinese emigrated to Taiwan
Vietnam Burma California Hawaii
Australia Canada the West Indies
Philippines
Indonesia and Malaysia the next wave of
Chinese who came later continued on to
Cuba Peru and Brazil by 1900 a good five
million Chinese had spread out around
the world by 1922 this number would
reach 8 million and of those 8 million
Chinese practically every one of them
came from either Guangdong Fujian Macau
or Hong Kong 335 thousand Chinese made
their way to the US between 1848 and
and most of those ended up in California
in 1852 alone 20,000 Chinese entered the
u.s. in San Francisco starting in 1867
with the construction of the Central
Pacific Railroad 40,000 laborers from
Guangdong would make the trans-pacific
voyage over the next few years by 1877 a
hundred and forty-eight thousand Chinese
called the u.s. home or at least a home
away from home and of that number if you
had to guess where they came from it was
probably one of 10 cities in Guangdong
the biggest for being Tai Shan Shan Kwai
caiping and unpin first the Gold Rush
and then the railroads a one-two punch
then once those numbers reached critical
mass the Chinese became a market unto
themselves that's when things really
began to take off and get organized and
whenever you needed to get your hands on
70 Chinese laborers for your particular
project you inevitably had to go to
someone within the Chinese community who
served as your channel to the labor
supply in the Middle Kingdom but once
1882 rolled around if you called
yourself Chinese the Golden Door in the
US was lot shut and if you remember
slavery had been abolished pretty much
everywhere by the 1850s and 60s America
was a little late to the party
so without the economic advantages of
slavery and with the whole industrial
revolution thing chugging at full blast
there exploded onto the scene a man
of worldwide market for cheap labor
there was a double demand for Chinese
labor not only for working as a cog in
the wheel of Western imperialism but
also as agricultural workers and miners
in the boom towns in California Hawaii
British Columbia Latin America and
pretty much from the get-go wherever
they went the Chinese were preyed upon
by racist bigots and all manners of sign
of phobes if they didn't resent the
Chinese for their industry and
achievement or for depressing workers
wages then they disliked them simply
because they were different and this
difference in appearance and culture was
always the racist last resort so with
all hope of legally entering the u.s.
down the drain Mexico became the place
to go to but it wasn't just a place to
go to so that you could use it as a
transit point to cross the border Mexico
during this time the 1870s and into the
80s it really was a land of opportunity
a hard-working guy from Guangdong could
do a lot worse than Mexico in the late
19th century that was the one thing that
really made it happen more than anything
else when the door closed in the United
States it opened up in Mexico the
President of Mexico was a man named
Porfirio Diaz he was the kind of leader
who wasn't what you'd call a liberal but
he championed all kinds of economic
reforms that enriched the country
especially those at the highest rung of
society and sponsored all kinds of
attempts at modernization he just didn't
like the dissenters to get in the way so
he was a little heavy-handed in that
respect but he'll get his as the Mexican
revolution starts to ramp up one of the
programs of the Diaz government called
for European settlers to be imported who
would serve a dual purpose first they
would provide the necessary labor to
work the lands and the Baron and Speer
sleep op you Layton northern part of
Mexico and as an ulterior motive the
white skin of these imported you
pians would in theory lighten the
overall skin color up in those parts and
these europeans would also bring with
them you know all their reputation for
hard work as well as some of the new
innovations it was a good plan but it
didn't work the summer months of
northern Mexico can be uncomfortably hot
the Sonoran Desert was and still is a
brutally unforgiving place so guess what
the Europeans didn't like the place and
that whole notion of bringing them into
northern Mexico was scrapped but the
labor shortage remained and this opened
the door for the Chinese in 1865 Emperor
Maximilian was the leader at the time
during this brief period of monarchy in
Mexico and the year he granted a certain
company the Campania decolonization as
the Atika the exclusive rights to import
laborers into Mexico these Chinese
laborers came at first to work in
agriculture and mining as well as Public
Works the period of Maximilian's rule in
Mexico was short-lived only lasting a
few years from 1864 to 1867 Republican
forces led by president Benito Juarez
put an end to this short period of
monarchy and had the emperor executed
but the Emperor Maximilian got the ball
rolling and by 1880 things began to
shift into a higher gear thanks to a man
by the name of Matias or Romero who in
his capacity as Mexico's finance
minister facilitated the mass
importation of Chinese labor into the
country Romero had written quote it
seems to me that the only colonists who
could establish themselves or work on
our coasts are Asian coming from
climates similar to ours primarily China
the great population of that vast empire
the fact that many of them are
agriculturalists the relatively low
wages they earn and the proximity of our
coast to Asia means that Chinese
immigration would be the easiest and
most convenient for both our coasts
and as an extra added benefit to all
this
Romero knew that this importation of
Labor and the dealings with the Chinese
would help cement better trade relations
between Mexico and China even though
there weren't any official diplomatic
relations between these two countries
the scheme really took off in the 1880s
dovetailing nicely with the new
restrictions that came as a result of
the American Chinese Exclusion Act in
1882 Romero had to go to Washington DC
to speak with the Chinese Minister there
to arrange for the importation of labor
into Mexico in 1884 an agency was set up
in Hong Kong that would serve as the
exporter of all this Chinese labor in
someone with good connections to the
Mexican government no doubt was given
the exclusive rights to transport all
these workers from all ports in Asia
this was the Mexican Pacific navigation
company between 1885 and 1889 matias
romero worked tirelessly via the Mexican
embassy in the u.s. to work out a
commercial treaty between Mexico and
China the only problem was again if you
consider the time period China was in
shambles and anyone who would be
responsible for such a decision had more
important things to do than discuss
trade with Mexico
so Romero due to the lack of a
negotiating partner found the going very
rough trying to work out a deal with the
dying Ching government but as his luck
would have it in 1891 Chinese diplomats
did finally reach out to Romero and over
the period of the next eight years with
the help of Vice President Ramon Corral
they worked out a deal and this became
known as the Treaty of Amity and
commerce and it was this treaty that
opened the floodgates of Chinese
immigration into Mexico and as far as
the government of Mexico was concerned
this was going to resolve the labor
shortage problem once and for all
the way things worked you just sign a
treaty and stick an ad in the
classifieds
the Mexicans need
a conduit to source the laborers in
China handle all the paperwork and
financing and get them into the country
to do this they called on the ones who
were the most expert when it came to
that business the leaders of the tongs
who ran San Francisco's Chinatown it was
these tongs known as the six companies
and their agents in Hong Kong and China
that served as the first authorized
contractors of Chinese labor to Mexico
it was the six companies or six tongs
that acted as chief sponsors of the
illegal smuggling of Chinese immigrants
as well the whole system was created
whereby agents would find these workers
and get them transported across the
Pacific to agents waiting on the other
side in the US and in Mexico and these
agents would distribute all this muscle
to whoever needed it and everyone got
rich off the trafficking and human labor
except the worker of course not only
were Chinese workers brought in to toil
in Mexico after 1882 intricate schemes
were put in place that brought the
laborers to Mexico where they would
later be smuggled across the border into
the u.s. the most popular u.s.
destinations back then were of course
San Francisco but also Tucson
San Diego El Paso New York Boston and
New Orleans in 1895 there were only a
thousand 23 Chinese and all of Mexico by
1910 this number had grown to over
13,000 and by 1926 this number almost
doubled to 24,000 218 now in the Chinese
context this might not seem like such a
big number between 1895 and 1910 when
the biggest wave of Chinese immigration
occurred in Mexico 70% of the immigrants
had come to Mexico via the US and if
that's 70 percent most of them worked in
the north in Baja Sonora Chihuahua
States whenever you talk about the
Chinese population it's easy to think in
terms of
superlatives about a 24,000 strong the
Chinese back then constituted Mexico's
second largest immigrant community
though clustered mostly in the northern
states of Mexico by 1910 Chinese
immigration had permeated every single
state in the country except for telex
Scala but the USA remained the highest
priority destination for the Chinese so
with Mexico's convenient geographic
location all kinds of ways were devised
to scam the system to get around the
Chinese Exclusion laws so it's
interesting to note that the first
illegal aliens to be sneaking across the
border into the USA and running from La
Migra were not the native Mexicans and
Latin Americans it was the Chinese this
system of smuggling Chinese across the
border into the u.s. via Mexico would
later hit the skids temporarily with the
outbreak of World War one due to the
interruption of trans-pacific shipping
so the informal worldwide association of
Chinese led by the six companies or
tongs in San Francisco directed this
entire flow of legitimate and
illegitimate human cargo to the labor
markets of the u.s. Canada Mexico and
Cuba these tongs didn't just engage in
human trafficking the majority of their
business was legit and involved trade
and goods as well Cuba had become a
major hub for Chinese looking for a way
into the u.s. the sugar plantations of
Cuba just couldn't get enough of this
Chinese labor between 1847 and 1874 over
a hundred and twenty five thousand
Chinese made their way to Cuba to work
the plantations as contract laborers
with the abolition of slavery in Cuba in
the 1870s and 80s there was an
unquenchable thirst for contract
laborers to cut sugarcane all day long
Cuba sort of mirrored Mexico in a way
and that all these contract Chinese
workers would work their way up from
dumb to small time merchants and
with the Cuban economy
like it was they thrived and prospered
and of course word got out about the
comparative riches that could be earned
by Chinese and Cuba so that led to many
more signing up to sail to the Americas
to try their luck by 1922 there were
90,000 Chinese in Cuba more than in the
US the six companies had a man in Cuba
an inch in Panaji he was the agent there
and served as the point man to move much
of this Chinese labor he worked with the
tongs to devise and carry out schemes to
smuggle Chinese from Cuba into Mexico
and to the u.s. up untill San Francisco
took over as the main center for the
smuggling trade Havana had been the
place
Havana had served the same role in the
Spanish galleon trade that Manila had
served Manila was the hub of all galleon
trade between Spain and East Asia Havana
was the hub between Spain and Latin
America but Chinese immigration to Cuba
didn't start until 1847 this whole
operation of trading and Chinese
laborers that stretched from the streets
of China to Havana Cuba was all run on
guanxi the Chinese had developed a
network of guanxi around the world as it
is in many cultures when you develop
certain bonds amongst your trusted
people anything was possible
certain men situated in certain cities
around the world with their reputations
alone to back up whatever they said they
would do moved Chinese labor all over
the place not everyone looked at Mexico
as a launching pad into the u.s. many
came there as their final destination to
live there after they had paid their
dues working as ranch hands launderers
cooks servants and gardeners during the
1880s and into the 20th century Mexico
Cuba and South America always had an
unquenchable thirst for Chinese workers
on the vast number of ranches and
plantations but all good things must
come to an end and in Mexico things took
a major turn for the
worse for the Chinese as soon as
nationalism began to take off the system
of importation of Chinese labor
championed by Mateo Romero had done well
during the time of Porfirio Diaz but
nationalism was on the rise and was used
by some Mexican politicians to further
their specific agendas the revolucin
mexicana began in 1910 and this spelled
the end for Diaz who had been in power
since the death of benito juarez in 1872
Diaz would be overthrown in 1911 which
was a happy day for the little guy who
had been totally left out of most of the
porfiriato era this was not a good thing
for the Chinese Mexicans or for
Ontario's as they became known those
Chinese who lived in the northern
frontier regions of Mexico one of the
things that always seemed to go
hand-in-hand with nationalism was
xenophobia Mexico was definitely raped
and pillaged for many years by European
interests I guess going back to the time
of Cortes so there was quite a big
pent-up backlash against these
foreigners in Mexico and the Chinese got
swept up into all this
you see they came as coolies first but
with their work ethic and having faced
the worst of times in China already
Mexico was really a land of great
opportunity where if you took that
Chinese work ethic there you could
really make something and this is what
they did and although no the caches were
created from this dynamic many Chinese
would inevitably open up small
businesses and prosper in a modest way
but modest as it may have been it was
much better than what the native
Mexicans normally enjoyed so a lot of
eyes got real red from this relative
Chinese success and so the Chinese as
the revolutio began to unfold got caught
up in a violent wave of anti Chinese
they had seemed immune from all the
events that had been slowly leading up
to the Mexican Revolution but 1917 saw
policies that began to restrict
immigration so not only were the doors
closed in the USA now they were closing
in Mexico to the racial slurs began to
fly and the politicians spoke to ears
more than willing to hear what they
already felt that the Chinese were a
race of contaminate errs unhygenic vice
ridden and claims were made that the
Chinese spread disease and contributed
highly to the degeneration of the
Mexican race and in these revolutionary
times they have been accused of
faithfully supporting all of the
policies for all of these years of
Porfirio Diaz that had called for
liberal immigration laws for an
investment and involvement and
plundering Mexico's wealth this is what
led to the uprisings that resulted in
the Mexican Revolution and the growth of
what became known later as the partido
revolution audio institutio nod or PRI
for short the current President of
Mexico Enrique Pena Nieto and just about
every president since the revolution
except for Vicente Fox was a member of
this party so after 1917 voices began to
call for the expulsion of Chinese from
Mexico in general and from Sonora State
in particular in these times that
stressed patriotism nationalism and
xenophobia the call went out to the
people to Mexican eyes themselves the
country and the economy and nowhere was
the sentiment stronger than in the north
all these years the native Mexicans had
to watch as the Chinese climbed the
economic ladder leaving them behind and
even worse marrying their women now came
the chance to blow off a little of that
pent-up steam the anti Chinese
propaganda in Mexico during the
Revolution and into the 1920s and 30s
was pretty much the same
is what you found in the US during the
1870s and 80s the idea of Chinese men
marrying local Mexican women was
considered particularly repugnant and
for their actions these women will be
particularly singled out by their
countrymen as traitors
they'll be booted out of Mexico along
with their husbands a particular kind of
scorn was placed on these Mexican women
who married Chinese men adjectives used
to describe them were words like dirty
lazy unpatriotic and shameless it was a
popular saying that these women were
lazy and lived off their rich Chinese
husbands to avoid having to do any
honest work there are plenty of cartoon
sketches and whatnot from back then that
can attest to this one such cartoon had
the caption quote Oh wretched woman you
thought you would enjoy a cheap life by
giving yourself to a Chinese man and
instead you are a slave and the fruit of
your mistake is a freak of nature pretty
heavy stuff ironically when the Mexican
wives got kicked out of Mexico with
their husbands they usually made their
way back to the husband's village in
China and many of them found they were
relegated to are and I our second wife
status as their husbands already had a
wife and whole other family in the home
country but overall when you peeled the
onion all the way to the center the
Mexican people who lived amongst the
Chinese and these towns located in the
three states of Baja Sonora and
Chihuahua well in other places too they
mostly resented the Chinese hard-earned
economic success and when Mexico's
economy began to take a turn for the
worse at the same time when the
population was rising this produced a
deadly mixture of animosity that led to
all kinds of atrocities being committed
against the Chinese by the 1920s there
were laws put in place that reserved
jobs for Mexicans only the 20s were
especially
for the Chinese in Mexico associations
began to spring up that led the charge
against immigration and for their
expulsion from Mexico but most notorious
of them was the commercial association
of businessmen in Magdalena de Chino
this was led by the man who became the
champion of the anti Chinese movement
Jose Maria Arianna Arana became the face
of the antichain East those who took a
page out of the PlayBook written up in
California about how best to persecute
the Chinese between 1911 and 1919 as
many as eight hundred and fourteen
Chinese were killed they were killed by
both soldiers and civilians and looting
Chinese groceries and stores became a
regular occurrence
they were looted by soldiers and then by
the locals who would jump into the fray
it was just like you see in today's
society when riots occur the
association's purpose was to defend the
Mexican merchants and to rid Sonora of
Chinese business owners others followed
as the 20s unfolded there was the
committee directive OD anti-chinese mo
nacional en La Liga Nacional o Brera
auntie Gina I'm sure you don't need to
hablas espanol to know what the nature
of those organizations were these groups
lobbied hard to get their politicians to
pass anti-chinese legislation
segregation deportation and laws against
intermarriage Sonoran authorities have
been calling for the end of Chinese
immigration since 1921 and for the end
of the Treaty of Amity and commerce that
had launched the massive wave of Chinese
into Mexico the Chinese consulate closed
in 1922 hundreds of Chinese met grisly
deaths in northern Mexico during the
years of the Mexican Revolution and into
the 20s and 30s on May 15th
1911 303 Chinese have been murdered in a
single day at the massacre of 2000 this
was the signature event that came to
symbolize the anti Chinese
violence that later led to all these
mass deportations
podan is located in the state of
Coahuila
right on the border with durango with
the permission of their superior
officers revolutionary soldiers let
loose on the Chinese of torren between
May 13th and 15th 1911 and the last day
of the massacre May 15th
303 Chinese and five Japanese were
murdered the looting and downright
robberies that were carried out led to
losses of eight hundred and fifty
thousand dollars that was nineteen
eleven dollars a vast figure in that day
this torren Massacre was the single
greatest act of violence committed
against Chinese anywhere in the Americas
a wave of anti-chinese sentiment
preceded the massacre things just didn't
happen spontaneously resentment had been
building up for a while against the
Chinese community of torren there were
perhaps only six seven hundred Chinese
in the city so you can see about half
the population was murdered in a single
act of violence the city had been held
by the Federal Army but they were about
to be shooed away by the revolutionary
soldiers who were called modernista x'
after the man who helped overthrow
Porfirio Diaz Francisco Madero later the
33rd President of Mexico
once the modesties took over in Torreon
the bloodbath ensued let me quote one
report taken from Robert Charles book
the Chinese in Mexico 1882 1940 Libby
quotes the town was searched for Chinese
and all who could be found were murdered
in the most brutal and horrifying manner
in one instance the head of a
was severed from his body and thrown
from the window into the street in
another instance a soldier took a little
boy by the heels and battered his brains
out against a lamppost in another
instance a was pulled to pieces
in the street by horses hitched to his
arms and legs no language can
adequately depict the revolting scenes
which attended this carnival of human
slaughter the mind recoils in horror
from the contemplation of such an
atrocity everything regarding the
massacre was well documented in a report
made on June 7th 1911 called quote the
report of investigation of the Chinese
Massacre was made by the US consular
agent Cece Carruthers like you had when
atrocities were meted out against
European Jews by the Nazis there were
also plenty of local Mexicans and good
Samaritans who risk their lives to hide
as many Chinese as they could and spare
them from the killing not only were
Chinese killed and their places of
business robbed and looted private
Chinese homes in Torreon were also
broken into set on fire and completely
ransacked justice was sought and in 1913
an indemnity was agreed upon between the
government of Mexico and China whereby
the mexican government agreed to pay 3.2
million u.s. dollars for the loss of
china's subjects in their country
nothing was ever handed over those was
only a symbolic victory rivalries
politics and factions in China and in
Chinatown in the 1920s began to divide
the overseas Chinese fighting and
violence often erupted between these
Chinese factions and this became known
as the Tong wars of 1922 1924 the
rivalry between the Guangdong and Qi
kong-kong spilled into Mexico and the
violence and infighting that climax in
1927 was conveniently used as a further
reason to push for this move a mento
empty chino that called for deporting
not only the troublemakers but any other
Chinese Mexican they could snag in the
net the slow stream of deportations
turned into a flood so that by the 1930s
70% of the
Chinese in Mexico have been deported or
expelled the deportations were mostly in
the north and Sonora and Sinaloa on
August 8th 1922 over 300 Chinese were
sent back to China by order of no less a
personage than El Presidente Alvaro
Obregon himself but all over Mexico
Chinese weren't safe and faced not only
getting kicked out of the country but
having all their assets confiscated too
you see there's an old trick that goes
back to ancient times whenever you
wanted to make some quick and easy money
all you had to do is kick out the
foreigner and you know using
intimidation and violence you force them
out before they have any chance to put
their affairs in order then as soon as
you see the last of them you can jump in
and help yourself to their house their
business and any other property and
assets the victims left behind in their
hurry to flee for their lives
the Jews face this in Nazi Germany and
so did the Chinese in 1930s Mexico two
governors in particular played a major
hand in the deportation of Chinese from
Mexico Francisco s Elias and his
successor Rudolfo Elias Caius but for
the Chinese it was particularly
difficult when they were deported from
Sonora many of them were led to the
border with Arizona and just dumped on
the other side with the Chinese
Exclusion Act still in full force the
u.s. immigration authorities in Arizona
wouldn't let these Chinese in and just
threw them all in these immigration
jails where they'd linger indefinitely
many died from the abuse they faced
living in this world of political and
legal limbo the Mexican authorities did
a splendid job and ridding the nation of
Chinese the 1937 president lzaro
crdenas expropriated all lands owned by
foreigners including from the Chinese
this act chased a lot of them out of
Mexico at a time of a 1940 census they
were found to be only 92 Chinese in all
of Sonora and that's in the state of
Sinaloa
the population of Chinese had gone from
2123 to 165 the same kind of thing was
going on in Baja and Chihuahua State all
in the north of Mexico but it was in
Sonora where the Chinese were most
plentiful that they got at the worst in
fact in all of Mexico's 31 states and
the federal district of Ciudad Mexico
Chinese felt the hammer come down hard
on them in the 1920s the Chinese
Mexicans of Mexico City were forced to
go live in ghettos but the violence that
was so horrible in the north didn't get
as much traction down in South because
of the Chinese Exclusion Act most of the
Chinese ended up getting deported back
to China to Guangdong Macau and Hong
Kong Macau with its Portuguese heritage
and tolerance for mixed marriages was
the preferred place to go to after
arriving back in Asia and after arriving
in Chinese lands many of these Chinese
Mexicans fought for years for the right
of return this fight lasted from the 30s
all the way into the 60s there were
people inside Mexico who fought on
behalf of the Chinese to allow them to
return and slowly as attitudes changed
and laws change with the attitudes
things began to loosen up the first ones
allowed back were the Mexican born wives
of these Chinese deportees their
husbands followed later as the rise and
anti-communism sort of began to heat up
in Mexico with this kind of
anti-communist sentiment coming to the
aid of these Chinese was seen as a good
thing since in most cases they were
anti-communist too after World War two
there were many Chinese Mexican
repatriates who slowly made their way
back to Mexico
there were a lot of Hoops they had to
jump through in the process but with the
help of the Mexican government in the
50s and 60s many made the long trip back
to Mexico that was very much changed
from the time they left in the late 20s
and early 30s today in Mexico City there
are about 9,000
Chinese in all of Mexico about 14,000
overseas Chinese currently reside there
and there are perhaps 40 thousand
Mexicans of Chinese origin and like I
said the main centers where Chinese
reside are in the capital Mexico City
Mexico Lee Tijuana and also in the state
of Chiapas to prepare for this episode I
relied on three main sources the Chinese
in Mexico 1882 to 1940 by Robert Charo
Mero
published by the University of Arizona
press making the Chinese Mexican global
migration localism and exclusion in the
us-mexico border lands by grace Pina
Delgado published by Stanford University
Press and Chinese Mexicans trans-pacific
migration and the search for a homeland
1910 to 1960 by Julia
Maria Shaw Bonet Camacho published by
the University of North Carolina press
this wasn't a history that yielded up
any big names that you might see in the
history books the stories contained and
these three books are all of brave
unknown Chinese who made the dangerous
journey across the Pacific ended up in
Mexico because of the way events were
unfolding in the Americas and made a
life for themselves there were so many
success stories and stories of
incredible bravery and acts of love and
the face of the most terrible hardships
I didn't get into any of these specific
stories but if you're interested to read
up more on the subject there's plenty of
detail about many of the individual
stories and those three books I've named
this is gonna be the last podcast before
my upcoming trip to China I'll be on the
road from September 14 to the 29th gonna
be in Shenyang and Beijing I might try
and upload an episode when I'm out there
but we'll see hey I stumbled on some
great videos by a guy named Howie's
Southworth go on the Google and search
for Howie Southworth just like it sounds
and it'll take you to his YouTube and E
box television channels
he's another good example of someone who
was using his love of China to build
some nice bridges between the two
cultures how his specialty is bridging
the gulf between American and Chinese
cooking the show is called sauced in
translation and he also has one called
how we eat h o w IE eat i personally
recommend them hey a huge thanks goes
out to the people at dan Wacom Jeremy
gold corn and the whole crew there
thanks for selecting me as a model
worker for 2013 that's quite an honor I
look forward to thanking everyone there
personally when I get to Beijing that's
all I got P this time
this is Laszlo Montgomery signing off
from the town of Claremont California
nine one seven one one thanks for
listening adios and I hope you'll join
me next time for another dare I presume
exciting episode of the China history
podcast